# Noise Cancelling Repeat Finder &mdash; Mock Genomes

Simulated pacbio and nanopore reads from fake genomes embedded with some tandem
repeats.

# Mock Genome 1

(to be described later)

# Mock Genome 2

(to be described later)

# Mock Genome 3

The genome is a mix of random sequence and tandem repeats. The primary repeat
elements are have periods of 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, and 171 bp, shown below. GGAAT
is a highly studied 5-mer, and the 171-mer is alpha satellite. The other four
are randomly generated sequences.

```bash  
GGAAT
CACTGCTGGT
GTTAGCGGTCGTGCTGATGG
GGCTCCTATCTCGCCTGTTCCCGGGTTCCTCTTATTCTCA
GAGATTGGAGTCCAAGAAATTCAGTCACCTTTCAGCGGTTCCAGTCACGGCGCTAAGTGCCTATTGACCCGCTACTGTTT
TCTGTCTAGTTTTTATATGAAGATATTCCCTTTTCCACCATAATCCTCAAAGCGCTCCAAATATCCACTTGCAGATTCTACAAAAAGAGTGTTTCCAAACTGCTCTATCAAAAGAAATGTTCAACTCTGTGAGTTGAATACACACATCACAAAGAAGTTTCTGAGAATGCT
```  

A total of 2,000 repeats were generated, with lengths sampled from a normal
distribution with mu=1000, sigma=400, but with minimum length 500. About half
of the repeats were chosen from the six primary elements. The others were from
elements with edit distance 1 from those; these elements are intended as false
positive bait for processes searching for the primary elements.

Repeats were positioned randomly across a single-sequence "genome", with a
minimum separation of 500 bp between neighboring repeats. A repeat can begin
anywhere within its repeated motif, and can appear as either forward or reverse
complement.

Total length of the genome is 3.3Mbp, of which 2.1Mbp is repeats.

The genome is in genome3.fa. Positions of the embedded motifs, in the genome,
are recorded in genome3.truth.dat.

Fake reads were sampled from this genome, separately simulating pacbio and
nanopore sequencing error profiles. The error profiles were derived from
published alignments. For pacbio this was 1.7% mismatch rate, 8.9% single-base
insertion, 4.3% single-base deletion. For nanopore, this was 7.4% mismatch
rate, 2.0% single-base insertion, 10.2% single-base deletion.

Overall coverage (of the genome) is intended to be about 5X. Read lengths were
pulled from a distribution with min=1K, max=20K, and mu=7,333 (the p.d.f. drops
linearly from a high at 1K to zero at 20K).

The reads are in genome3.pacbio.fa and genome3.nanopore.fa. The true alignments
of the reads (to the genome) are recorded in genome3.pacbio.cigars and
genome3.nanopore.cigars.

True alignments of the embedded motif intervals on the reads are recorded in
genome3.pacbio.truth.ncrf and genome3.nanopore.truth.ncrf. Note that while
these are in a format similar to the output from NcRF, they were not generated
by an aligner. Instead, they are derived from the truth that was generated by
the simulation process.
